---
title: Error Entropy
date: 2026-04-20 15:24:43
tags:

categories:
- Machine Learning
---

## Introduction

[https://arxiv.org/pdf/2510.04067](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2510.04067)

The paper analyze a phenomenon that the cross-entropy loss scales slower when the model getting scaled larger. They break the CE loss into three part: Error Entropy, Self Alignment and Confidence.

They argues that the EE is really the scaling prat and shows that the decomposition aligns with the experiment.


## Definition

Let $i$ be the index of input data, $v_i$ be the correct token for this data. $\mathcal{V}$ is the vocabulary. $s_i$ is the model's output probability score for $v_i$

They define a "random variable" that 

$$
R=\text{the rank of the ground truth token in model's next token prediction}
$$

Original Def:
$$
\mathrm{RBE}(v_i)=\sum_{v\in \mathcal{V}} \mathbf{1}\braces{s_v>s_{v_i}}.
$$

Examples:

> Prefix: I would like to eat some

| apple | banana |
| --- | --- |
| 0.2 | 0.8 |

The correct token is banana.

So the RBE = 0 since banana is ranked first.

Next, they define a probability distribution function $p_e$:

$$
p_e = \mathrm{Pr}\bracket{RBE(v_i)=e|v_i\in \mathcal D}
$$

here $\mathcal D$ is the collection of all output GT tokens in the corpus.

> Remark: $p_e$ is the probability form of $RBE$ averaging over the tokens.

The definition of $p_e$ is we focus on next token, and we seek the distribution of its rank (in predicition).

On the other hand, we can define $q_e$, which focuses on a vocabulary and observe its ranking.

The definition of paper:

$$
Q_e= \text{GeoMean}(\braces{s_{v_i}|RBE(v_i)=e}), q_e=\frac{Q_e}{C}, C=\sum_{e} Q_e.
$$


### Explanation and Decomposition

Formally, let $R:\mathcal{V} \to \R^+$ be a random variable determined by the context $(x_{<t},x_t)$ by a conditional distribution $q(x_t | x_{<t})$ (ideal model, real distribution) and model distribution $p_{\theta}(x_t|x_{<t})$.



$$
\begin{aligned}
R(x_t \mid x_{<t}) := \sum_{v \in V} \mathbf{1}\{p_\theta(v \mid x_{<t}) > p_\theta(x_t \mid x_{<t})\}
\end{aligned}
$$

$$
p_e := \Pr_{(x_{<t}, x_t) \sim q^*}[R = e]
$$

$$
\log Q_e =  \mathbb E_{(x_{<t},x_t)\sim q^*, R(x_t| x_{<t})=e} [\log p_{\theta}(x_t|x_{<t})]
$$

Consider the original CE loss
$$
CE=\mathbb E_{(x_t,x_{<t})\sim q}[\log p_{\theta}(x_t|x_{<t})]
$$

$$
\begin{aligned}
CE&= -\frac{1}{N} \sum_{i} s_i\\
&= -\frac{1}{N} \sum_{i} \log p_{\theta}(x_t^i|x_{<t}^i) \\
&= -\frac 1N\sum_{e} \sum_{i:R_i=e}  \log p_{\theta}(x_t^i|x_{<t}^i) \\
&= -\sum_{e} \frac{n_e}{N} \frac{1}{n_e} \sum_{i:R_i=e}  \log p_{\theta}(x_t^i|x_{<t}^i) \\
&= -\sum_{e} \frac{n_e}{N} \log \paren{\prod_{i:R_i=e} p_{\theta}(x^{i}_t|x^i_{<t})}^{1/n_e} \\
&= -\sum_{e} p_e \log Q_e
\end{aligned}
$$

Continue for decomposition
$$
\begin{aligned}
CE&=-\sum_{e}p_e \log Q_e\\
&=-\sum_{e} p_e \log q_e + \log C\\
&=\underbrace{-\sum_{e} p_e \log p_e}_{\text{Error Entropy}} +\underbrace{\mathrm{KL}(p_e\| q_e)}_{\text{Self Alignment}} + \underbrace{\log C}_{\text{Confidence}}
\end{aligned}
$$

## Comparsion with Energy-based Model

Given distribution $p(x)$
$$
p(x) \propto \exp(-\beta E(x)) 
$$

Remark: $-E(x)$ being logit here.

$$
Z= \int \exp(-\beta E(x)) dx
$$

$$
p(x) = \frac{\exp(-\beta E(x))}{Z}
$$

$$
-\log p(x) = \beta E(x) + \log Z
$$

$$
CE(q_{data},p)=\beta E_{q}[E(x)] + \log Z
$$

Now we further coarse-graining on ranking $R$ :

> Microstate $x = (x_{<t}, x_t)\sim q$ $\mapsto$  Macrostate $e = R_\theta(x_t \mid x_{<t}) \sim p_e$

We see $p_e$ is the empirical macrostate distribution.

Now, condition on $R=e$, we found the energy of marcostate as $\log Q_e$

We further assume the marcostate per se is generated by a Boltzmann distribution.

$$
q_e \propto \exp(-\beta_2 E_e^{\text{macro}}) = \exp(-\beta_2 [\beta_1 \bar{E}_e + \bar{A}_e])
$$
where $\bar{A}_e := \frac{1}{n_e}\sum_{i: R_i = e} \log Z_{\text{soft},i}$, $\bar{E}_e := \frac{1}{n_e}\sum_{i: R_i = e} E(x_t^{(i)}, x_{<t}^{(i)})$. 

$Z_{\text{soft},i}$ is the softmax denominator in the $i$-th token generation.


Gives:

1. $q_e$, Boltzmann probability indicated by the marco energy.

2. $C$, partition function of marcostate's Boltzmann distribution.

$$
CE=\beta_1 \mathbb E_q[{E(x)}] = \beta_1 \mathbb E_{p_e}[\log Q_e]
$$

$\beta_1$ relates to the temperature indicated by microstate.


Now we decompose the CE, found that there is a mismatch between the empirical macrostate distribution and the marco Boltzmann distribution.

$$
CE=\beta S + \underbrace{\mathrm{KL}(p_e\| q_e)}_{\text{How far we deviate from Grand Canonical Balance}} + \log C
$$

If $KL=0 \Rightarrow$ grand canonical equilibrium

But the model cannot directly allocate between state in ranks (you only see the prefix in a sample).
